docs/source/configuration/external_timelock_service_configs/timelock_client_config.rst, before:

.. _timelock-client-configuration:

Timelock Client Configuration
=============================

You will need to update your AtlasDB configuration in order to have said clients request timestamps and locks from
external Timelock Servers as opposed to their embedded services. This is an extension of the leader block configuration
options discussed at :ref:`leader-config`.

TimeLock client configuration spans both ``install`` and ``runtime`` configuration.

Install-Time Configuration
--------------------------

Instead of configuring a ``leader`` block, or both a ``timestamp`` and ``lock`` block, one must instead specify a
single ``timelock`` block if your product uses the Timelock Server. The ``leader`` block and the ``timestamp``/``lock``
blocks must be absent from the config if you are using the Timelock Server.

.. danger::

    Changing the TimeLock ``client`` will mean that one receives timestamps from a different timestamp service.
    This may result in **SEVERE DATA CORRUPTION** as the timestamp service's guarantees may be broken.
    Doing this safely requires a fast forward of the new client to at least the highest timestamp given out from the old client.
    Please contact the AtlasDB team for assistance on such an operation.

Required parameters:

.. list-table::
    :widths: 5 40
    :header-rows: 1

    *    - Property
         - Description

    *    - client
         - The name of your client, generally the same as your application name.
           Note that if the top-level AtlasDB ``namespace`` configuration parameter is set, then this parameter need not be set.
           However, if it is, then this parameter MUST be equal to the AtlasDB ``namespace``, or AtlasDB will fail to start.

           Note that client names must be non-empty and consist of only alphanumeric characters, dashes and
           underscores (succinctly, ``[a-zA-Z0-9_-]+``) and for backwards compatibility cannot be the reserved word ``leader``.

Optional parameters:

.. note::

    Specifying the ``serversList`` (a ``ServerListConfig``) in the install configuration has been deprecated, but is
    maintained for backward compatibility. Please switch to declaring the ``ServerListConfig`` in the runtime
    configuration as soon as possible.

    Also, note that we internally select ``serverList`` blocks as a whole, prioritising the block in the runtime
    configuration if it exists. In other words, if you want to specify a dynamic list of TimeLock nodes but a static
    security configuration, the static security configuration **must** be placed in the runtime configuration block.

.. list-table::
    :widths: 5 40
    :header-rows: 1

    *    - Property
         - Description

    *    - serversList::servers
         - A list of all hosts. The hosts must be specified as addresses, i.e. ``https://host:port``.
           AtlasDB assumes that the Timelock Servers being pointed at are part of the same Timelock cluster.
           If this is not provided, it defaults to the empty list.

    *    - serversList::sslConfiguration
         - The SSL configuration of the service. This should follow the
           `palantir/http-remoting-api <https://github.com/palantir/http-remoting-api/blob/1.4.0/ssl-config/src/main/java/com/palantir/remoting/api/config/ssl/SslConfiguration.java>`__
           library. This should also be in alignment with the protocol used when configuring the servers.

    *    - serversList::proxyConfiguration
         - The proxy configuration of the service. This should follow the
           `palantir/http-remoting-api <https://github.com/palantir/http-remoting-api/blob/1.4.0/service-config/src/main/java/com/palantir/remoting/api/config/service/ProxyConfiguration.java>`__
           library.

Runtime Configuration
---------------------

.. warning::

    Although we support starting up without knowledge of any TimeLock nodes, note that if you are using TimeLock
    your service will fail to start if there are no TimeLock nodes and asynchronous initialization
    (``initializeAsync``) is set to ``false``, as initializing a ``TransactionManager`` requires communication with
    TimeLock.

We support live reloading of the ``ServerListConfiguration`` for TimeLock. This can be optionally configured in the
``timelockRuntime`` block under AtlasDB's runtime configuration root.

Note that if this block is present, then the ``ServerListConfiguration`` in the install configuration will be ignored.

Also, although we support live-reloading of the server configuration, AtlasDB needs to know at install time that it
should talk to TimeLock - thus, the install configuration must contain a ``timelock`` block (even if said block is
possibly empty). Specifying an empty block in the configuration is done in the same way as specifying an empty block in
YAML i.e. ``{}``.

.. list-table::
    :widths: 5 40
    :header-rows: 1

    *    - Property
         - Description

    *    - serversList::servers
         - A list of all hosts. The hosts must be specified as addresses, i.e. ``https://host:port``.
           AtlasDB assumes that the Timelock Servers being pointed at are part of the same Timelock cluster.
           If this is not provided, it defaults to the empty list.

    *    - serversList::sslConfiguration
         - The SSL configuration of the service. This should follow the
           `palantir/http-remoting-api <https://github.com/palantir/http-remoting-api/blob/1.4.0/ssl-config/src/main/java/com/palantir/remoting/api/config/ssl/SslConfiguration.java>`__
           library. This should also be in alignment with the protocol used when configuring the servers.

    *    - serversList::proxyConfiguration
         - The proxy configuration of the service. This should follow the
           `palantir/http-remoting-api <https://github.com/palantir/http-remoting-api/blob/1.4.0/service-config/src/main/java/com/palantir/remoting/api/config/service/ProxyConfiguration.java>`__
           library.


.. _semantics-for-live-reloading:

Semantics for Live Reloading
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Feign and OkHttp do not appear to come with out-of-the-box for live reloading of proxy endpoints. Thus, when we
detect that the runtime config has changed, we create a new dynamic proxy.

Creating this proxy is a two step process. We first *resolve* the ``serversList`` configuration to be used - if there
is one present in the ``timelockRuntime`` block, then we use it. Otherwise we use the ``serversList`` configuration
from the ``timelock`` block in the install configuration.

What happens next depends on the size of the ``serversList`` used:

1. If the ``serversList`` appears to have zero nodes, we create a proxy that always throws a
   ``ServiceNotAvailableException``. Note that this functionality is important; we internally have scenarios
   where user services are initially completely unaware of TimeLock nodes.
2. If the ``serversList`` has one or more nodes, we create a proxy that delegates requests to those nodes, failing over
   to others if requests fail.

The above mechanisms have a few implications. Most significantly, if the relevant ``serversList`` block is changed,
requests that are in-flight will still be on the old Feign proxy. These may continue retrying until failure if,
for example, the older configuration was unaware of the TimeLock cluster leader. Similarly, these requests may also
continue to retry on nodes which have been removed from the cluster owing to traffic or other limitations.

.. _timelock-config-examples:

Timelock Configuration Examples
-------------------------------

Here is an example of an AtlasDB configuration with the ``timelock`` block.

.. warning::

    If you are using Cassandra, then automated migration will be performed when starting up your AtlasDB clients.
    If you are using another key-value-service, then you MUST ensure that you have migrated to the Timelock Server before
    adding a ``timelock`` block to the config.

Install Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

    namespace: yourapp

    atlasdb:
      keyValueService:
        type: cassandra
        servers:
          - cassandra:9160
        poolSize: 20
        credentials:
          username: cassandra
          password: cassandra
        sslConfiguration:
          trustStorePath: var/security/truststore.jks
        replicationFactor: 1
        mutationBatchCount: 10000
        mutationBatchSizeBytes: 10000000
        fetchBatchCount: 1000
        autoRefreshNodes: false

      initializeAsync: true

      timelock: {}

The example above uses the ``namespace`` parameter; the ``client`` we will use when connecting to TimeLock will be ``yourapp``.
We don't know the URLs of the TimeLock servers nor how we will talk to them, but that is okay.

Runtime Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: yaml

    timelockRuntime:
      serversList:
        servers:
          - "https://foo1:12345"
          - "https://foo2:8421"
          - "https://foo3:9421"
        sslConfiguration:
          trustStorePath: var/security/trustStore.jks
          keyStorePath: var/security/keyStore.jks
          keyStorePassword: 0987654321

AtlasDB will at runtime determine that the ``client`` to be used is ``yourapp`` and the servers are as indicated above,
and it will be able to route requests to TimeLock correctly.

Note that even if the ``timelock`` block in the install configuration included a ``serversList`` block, it would be
ignored, because we consider the ``serversList`` block in the runtime configuration to take precedence.

It is permitted for the ``serversList`` block here to be absent as well. In this case, AtlasDB will start up with
knowledge of zero TimeLock nodes. Attempts to initialize a ``TransactionManager`` will fail, but will continue
asynchronously in the background. Once the ``serversList`` block has been populated, initialization can proceed.

Also, note that if the ``timelock`` block was absent in the install configuration, then this block would be ignored,
and AtlasDB would start up using embedded timestamp and lock services.

Commit message:

Fail Fast on Unclear TimeLock Install/Runtime Configuration Pairs (#2850)
* Add assertNoSpuriousTimeLock...

* Tests

* release notes

* Permit no-timelock-block in Install if there's a timelock in Runtime

* new release notes

* client docs improvements

* CR comments part 1

* update release notes

docs/source/configuration/external_timelock_service_configs/timelock_client_config.rst, after:

.. _timelock-client-configuration:

Timelock Client Configuration
=============================

You will need to update your AtlasDB configuration in order to have said clients request timestamps and locks from
external Timelock Servers as opposed to their embedded services. This is an extension of the leader block configuration
options discussed at :ref:`leader-config`.

TimeLock client configuration spans both ``install`` and ``runtime`` configuration.

Install-Time Configuration
--------------------------

Instead of configuring a ``leader`` block, or both a ``timestamp`` and ``lock`` block, one must instead specify a
single ``timelock`` block if your product uses the Timelock Server. The ``leader`` block and the ``timestamp``/``lock``
blocks must be absent from the config if you are using the Timelock Server.

.. danger::

    Changing the TimeLock ``client`` will mean that one receives timestamps from a different timestamp service.
    This may result in **SEVERE DATA CORRUPTION** as the timestamp service's guarantees may be broken.
    Doing this safely requires a fast forward of the new client to at least the highest timestamp given out from the old client.
    Please contact the AtlasDB team for assistance on such an operation.

Required parameters:

.. list-table::
    :widths: 5 40
    :header-rows: 1

    *    - Property
         - Description

    *    - client
         - The name of your client, generally the same as your application name.
           Note that if the top-level AtlasDB ``namespace`` configuration parameter is set, then this parameter need not be set.
           However, if it is, then this parameter MUST be equal to the AtlasDB ``namespace``, or AtlasDB will fail to start.

           Note that client names must be non-empty and consist of only alphanumeric characters, dashes and
           underscores (succinctly, ``[a-zA-Z0-9_-]+``) and for backwards compatibility cannot be the reserved word ``leader``.

Optional parameters:

.. note::

    Specifying the ``serversList`` (a ``ServerListConfig``) in the install configuration has been deprecated, but is
    maintained for backward compatibility. Please switch to declaring the ``ServerListConfig`` in the runtime
    configuration as soon as possible.

    Also, note that we internally select ``serverList`` blocks as a whole, prioritising the block in the runtime
    configuration if it exists. In other words, if you want to specify a dynamic list of TimeLock nodes but a static
    security configuration, the static security configuration **must** be placed in the runtime configuration block.

.. list-table::
    :widths: 5 40
    :header-rows: 1

    *    - Property
         - Description

    *    - serversList::servers
         - A list of all hosts. The hosts must be specified as addresses, i.e. ``https://host:port``.
           AtlasDB assumes that the Timelock Servers being pointed at are part of the same Timelock cluster.
           If this is not provided, it defaults to the empty list.

    *    - serversList::sslConfiguration
         - The SSL configuration of the service. This should follow the
           `palantir/http-remoting-api <https://github.com/palantir/http-remoting-api/blob/1.4.0/ssl-config/src/main/java/com/palantir/remoting/api/config/ssl/SslConfiguration.java>`__
           library. This should also be in alignment with the protocol used when configuring the servers.

    *    - serversList::proxyConfiguration
         - The proxy configuration of the service. This should follow the
           `palantir/http-remoting-api <https://github.com/palantir/http-remoting-api/blob/1.4.0/service-config/src/main/java/com/palantir/remoting/api/config/service/ProxyConfiguration.java>`__
           library.

Runtime Configuration
---------------------

.. warning::

    Although we support starting up without knowledge of any TimeLock nodes, note that if you are using TimeLock
    your service will fail to start if there are no TimeLock nodes and asynchronous initialization
    (``initializeAsync``) is set to ``false``, as initializing a ``TransactionManager`` requires communication with
    TimeLock.

We support live reloading of the ``ServerListConfiguration`` for TimeLock. This can be optionally configured in the
``timelockRuntime`` block under AtlasDB's runtime configuration root.

Note that if this block is present, then the ``ServerListConfiguration`` in the install configuration will be ignored.

Also, although we support live-reloading of the server configuration, AtlasDB needs to know at install time that it
should talk to TimeLock. In versions of Atlas before 0.74.0, this is done by specifying an empty YAML object
for the timelock block in the install configuration (i.e. ``timelock: {}``); in more recent versions, the presence
of a ``timelockRuntime`` block is enough - *however*, it must already be present at install time, or AtlasDB
will attempt to start up using embedded services.

.. list-table::
    :widths: 5 40
    :header-rows: 1

    *    - Property
         - Description

    *    - serversList::servers
         - A list of all hosts. The hosts must be specified as addresses, i.e. ``https://host:port``.
           AtlasDB assumes that the Timelock Servers being pointed at are part of the same Timelock cluster.
           If this is not provided, it defaults to the empty list.

    *    - serversList::sslConfiguration
         - The SSL configuration of the service. This should follow the
           `palantir/http-remoting-api <https://github.com/palantir/http-remoting-api/blob/1.4.0/ssl-config/src/main/java/com/palantir/remoting/api/config/ssl/SslConfiguration.java>`__
           library. This should also be in alignment with the protocol used when configuring the servers.

    *    - serversList::proxyConfiguration
         - The proxy configuration of the service. This should follow the
           `palantir/http-remoting-api <https://github.com/palantir/http-remoting-api/blob/1.4.0/service-config/src/main/java/com/palantir/remoting/api/config/service/ProxyConfiguration.java>`__
           library.


.. _semantics-for-live-reloading:

Semantics for Live Reloading
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Feign and OkHttp do not appear to come with out-of-the-box for live reloading of proxy endpoints. Thus, when we
detect that the runtime config has changed, we create a new dynamic proxy.

Creating this proxy is a two step process. We first *resolve* the ``serversList`` configuration to be used - if there
is one present in the ``timelockRuntime`` block, then we use it. Otherwise we use the ``serversList`` configuration
from the ``timelock`` block in the install configuration.

What happens next depends on the size of the ``serversList`` used:

1. If the ``serversList`` appears to have zero nodes, we create a proxy that always throws a
   ``ServiceNotAvailableException``. Note that this functionality is important; we internally have scenarios
   where user services are initially completely unaware of TimeLock nodes.
2. If the ``serversList`` has one or more nodes, we create a proxy that delegates requests to those nodes, failing over
   to others if requests fail.

The above mechanisms have a few implications. Most significantly, if the relevant ``serversList`` block is changed,
requests that are in-flight will still be on the old Feign proxy. These may continue retrying until failure if,
for example, the older configuration was unaware of the TimeLock cluster leader. Similarly, these requests may also
continue to retry on nodes which have been removed from the cluster owing to traffic or other limitations.

.. _timelock-config-examples:

Timelock Configuration Examples
-------------------------------

Here is an example of an AtlasDB configuration with the ``timelock`` block.

.. warning::

    If you are using Cassandra, then automated migration will be performed when starting up your AtlasDB clients.
    If you are using another key-value-service, then you MUST ensure that you have migrated to the Timelock Server before
    adding a ``timelock`` block to the config.

Install Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. note::

    In versions of AtlasDB before 0.74.0, you will need to specify an empty ``timelock`` block as a child of the
    ``atlasdb`` block. This block looks like the following: ``timelock: {}``.

.. code-block:: yaml

    namespace: yourapp

    atlasdb:
      keyValueService:
        type: cassandra
        servers:
          - cassandra:9160
        poolSize: 20
        credentials:
          username: cassandra
          password: cassandra
        sslConfiguration:
          trustStorePath: var/security/truststore.jks
        replicationFactor: 1
        mutationBatchCount: 10000
        mutationBatchSizeBytes: 10000000
        fetchBatchCount: 1000
        autoRefreshNodes: false

      initializeAsync: true

The example above uses the ``namespace`` parameter; the ``client`` we will use when connecting to TimeLock will be ``yourapp``.
We don't know the URLs of the TimeLock servers nor how we will talk to them, but that is okay.

Runtime Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. note::

    In versions of AtlasDB before 0.74.0, if the ``timelock`` block was absent in the install configuration, then this
    block would be ignored, and AtlasDB would start up using embedded timestamp and lock services.

.. code-block:: yaml

    timelockRuntime:
      serversList:
        servers:
          - "https://foo1:12345"
          - "https://foo2:8421"
          - "https://foo3:9421"
        sslConfiguration:
          trustStorePath: var/security/trustStore.jks
          keyStorePath: var/security/keyStore.jks
          keyStorePassword: 0987654321

AtlasDB will at runtime determine that the ``client`` to be used is ``yourapp`` and the servers are as indicated above,
and it will be able to route requests to TimeLock correctly.

Note that even if the ``timelock`` block in the install configuration included a ``serversList`` block, it would be
ignored, because we consider the ``serversList`` block in the runtime configuration to take precedence.

It is permitted for the ``serversList`` block here to be absent as well. In this case, AtlasDB will start up with
knowledge of zero TimeLock nodes. Attempts to initialize a ``TransactionManager`` will fail, but will continue
asynchronously in the background. Once the ``serversList`` block has been populated, initialization can proceed.
